WinGroove Soundfont

Created by Zorilla (original WinGroove software by Hiroki Nakayama)

Release Date: 07-22-2017
v1.2 Update: 08-23-2019

This should work with any software that supports SF2 soundfonts, but I created
it with the intention of being used with CoolSoft VirtualMIDISynth, which can
be found here:

http://coolsoft.altervista.org/en/virtualmidisynth

Once installed, be sure to turn on sinc interpolated sample mixing in the
Options tab. For some reason, it is turned off by default. This soundfont
contains a lot of samples at reduced sample rates, and this greatly improves
the quality of their playback.


Background
----------

WinGroove was a MIDI software synthesizer written by Hiroki Nakayama and
released in the mid-1990s. It was designed to be fast and lightweight enough
to run on a 486DX running Windows 3.1 and featured a sound bank that barely
exceeded 1 MB. Unfortunately, WinGroove never saw any major updates beyond
its initial release, and was only ever available as a 16-bit, Windows 3.1-
compatible application.

Although it is possible to run WinGroove on just about any 32-bit Windows
operating system, most of us have upgraded to 64-bit ages ago, which means it
is no longer possible to run 16-bit applications now that the NTVDM
compatibility layer has been removed. Now that I have converted WinGroove to a
soundfont, it is now possible to enjoy its sound once again on modern systems.


Changelog
---------

v1.2 (work resumed, again) (08-22-2019)
-----

- Pitch scaling has been fixed for Woodblock

v1.2 (work resumed) (06-16-2018)
-----

- Switched from WinGroove 0.9E to 0.A4 Beta-2 as my reference and my previous
  solution for reverb is now all wrong (setting all instruments to 50% reverb).
  Versions of WinGroove after 0.9E have much better reverb and chorus control
  and let you adjust them through MIDI control change events instead of just
  applying a fixed amount globally. I have decided to remove reverb values from
  the soundfont and let the MIDI output device handle it so that CC events can
  be interpreted properly instead of getting overridden by the minimum value
  set in the soundfont. This was affecting quite a few songs, including
  TK_EATS.MID (a WinGroove demo song), which sets very low reverb during the
  first few bars of the song and then raises it afterward.
  
- Pitch and volume envelope fixes for Saw Lead, Polysynth, Space Voice, Metal
  Pad, and Echo Drops
  
- One of the two samples used in Polysynth was changed from Synth Brass to Saw
  Lead (which is what it should have been from the start). Between this change
  and the envelope fixes, Passport.mid sounds a lot less grating now.
  
- Crystal now uses the correct percussive sample (Glockenspiel instead of
  NylonStrGt).

- Added a third NylonStrGt sample (for notes F5 and up) that I missed
  previously because it sounded so similar to the one below it when played at
  certain notes. This also ended up being the correct attack sample I couldn't
  find previously for the Atmosphere instrument.
  
- Found a version of the Warm Pad sample without celeste. This is good because
  none of the 7 composite instruments that used this sample had that effect
  applied to it (only the original Warm Pad did).

v1.2 (08-25-2017)
-----

- Exclusive class fixes for drums (e.g. instruments that intentionally cut each
  other off - scratch push & pull, crash cymbals, triangle were affected)

- Vibrato rates now much more faithful to original instruments

- 05 - E. Piano 2 - G6 was tuned an octave too low

- Instruments now bear their original names as seen in WinGroove's instruments
  window
  
- P08 - Drs.Room Kit now uses the same alternate hi-hat tunings as P01 - Drs.
  Standard Kit 2 like it should.

v1.1 (7-23-2017)
----

- Added Dance drum set (#26). All drum sets from WinGroove are now implemented.

- P25 - BD attack sounded too soft in soundfont players due to trimming too
  aggressively. Re-recorded the drum and left the ~300 samples of noise before
  the actual kick drum starts.
  
- Trimmed and looped P25 - BD. Removed P25 - Ac. BD and shared it with P25 -
  BD (they were essentially the same instrument with different volume decay).
  
- P00 - Slap was tuned to the wrong root key, possibly due to a typo. Changed
  from 28 to 38.


Development Notes
-----------------

- The samples for WinGroove were stored in a file called WINGROOV.TPD. When
  inspecting its contents with a sound editor like Audacity, the samples it
  contains appear to be some form of PCM, but they come out sounding overdriven
  with lots of soft clipping. I suspect it is using some sort of nonstandard
  amplitude mapping that no other application understands.

  This meant I had to fall back to dubbing each note, figuring out the loop
  points, and configuring the note envelopes and other properties, all by hand.
  Because of this, I wasn't able to match WINGROOV.TPD's miniscule file size.
  Maybe if I had direct access to the original sample data, I could have gotten
  a better feel for how much I actually needed from each sample. 3.34 MB is
  still a pretty great result, considering the size of some of the other
  soundfonts released to the public.
  
  UPDATE (08-22-2019): a user on the VOGONS forums named pachuco was able to
  determine that the samples stored in WINGROOV.TPD were encoded in µ-Law, but
  with the lower half of the sample inverted, and was able to provide a copy of
  the entire sample bank converted into a more commonly readable format. For
  the first time, I am able to hear the samples in their raw, unaltered form,
  and at their original sample rate. This paves the way to further improving
  accuracy and reducing the soundfont's file size.

- Because of WinGroove's age and incomatibility with modern versions of Windows
  I had to resort to running it from Windows 3.1 running in DOSBox to record
  its samples. This meant that I had to compose a MIDI file that played the
  series of notes I was interested in recording (usually a chromatic ascent or
  octaves and fifths), copy it over to DOSBox, play it back in WGPlayer, and
  record the output in Audacity. This was usually enough to figure out the
  sample ranges for each instrument (although considering WinGroove's
  lightweight nature, very few instruments used more than one sample each--and
  many reused samples from other instruments with some minor tweak to make them
  unique).

- As is usually the case, this soundfont is not 100% accurate. For one thing,
  envelopes work differently in WinGroove than they do in a modern soundfont
  player like VirtualMIDISynth. Many instruments in WinGroove have a linear
  decay instead of logarithmic, and I have not found a way to achieve this in a
  soundfount.
  
  Volume may be another issue. I've tried to match the sound levels of
  instruments to one another as closely as possible, but those with a keen ear
  may still find that a certain instrument sounds slightly louder or quieter
  than it did in WinGroove.